# Cleaning Data

"The data cleaning process starts with raw data and results in clean and tidy data. It involves making sure the observations are structured in an appropriate way and variables are in **appropriate formats.** Data cleaning may involve many steps, and it's good practice to document every step. An important step of data cleaning is to make sure all important variables are stored in an appropriate format. Binary variables are best stored as 0 or 1. Qualitative variables with several values may be stored as text or numbers. It is usually good practice to store them as numbers, in which case there should be a correspondence to say what number means what: this is called **value labeling**. Cleaning variables may include slicing up text, extracting numerical information, or transforming text into numbers. Another important step is **identifying missing values** and making appropriate decisions on them. As we have described above, we have several options. We may opt to leave them as missing; then missing values need to be stored in a way that the statistical software recognizes. Data cleaning also involves making sure that the values of each variable are within their **admissible range**. Values outside the range are best replaced as missing unless it is obvious what the value was meant to be. Sometimes we need to change the **units of measurement**, such as prices in another currency, or replace very large numbers with measures in thousands or millions ... As part of data cleaning, variable description (also called **variable labels**) should be prepared to show the content of variables with all the important details ... In a spreadsheet, those labels should be stored in a separate sheet or document ... It is good practice to make the tidy data file leaner, containing the variables we need, and work with that data file ... Often, there are multiple ways to address the same issue, and there may not be a single best solution available. We have seen examples of this for handling apparent duplicates in the data with different values of the same variable or handling missing values. When the issue in question affects a few observations, that ambiguity is unlikely to be a problem. When it affects many observations, it may have effects on the results of our analysis. In such a case it is good practice to try different solutions to the problem and see whether and how that affects the results of the analysis. This process is called **robustness checking**." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;
