# Data Table Format

Tidy data is a standard way of mapping the meaning of a dataset to its structure. A dataset is messy or tidy depending on how rows, columns, and tables are matched up with observations, variables, and types. In **tidy data**, every column is a variable, every row is an observation, and every cell is a single value.

"Multi-dimensional data may be stored in more than one way in data tables ... The tidy approach recommends storing Xt data in a data table with each row referring to one cross-sectional unit (i) observed in one time period (t). Thus, one row is one observation (it). This is called **the long format** for Xt data. The first row is the first time period of the first cross-sectional unit. The next row is the same cross-sectional unit observed in the next time period. After the last time period observed for this cross-sectional unit, the next row in the data table is the first time period for the next cross-sectional unit. Correspondingly, observations in Xt data are identified by two ID variables, one for each cross-sectional unit and one for each time period." (Bekez, 2021)&#x20;

"An alternative, but not tidy, way of storing multi-dimensional data is called **the wide format** for Xt data. Here one row would refer to one cross-sectional unit, and different time periods are represented in different columns. Thus, there are as many columns for each variable as the number of time periods in the data. Here each observation is a different cross-sectional unit to be identified by the cross-sectional identifier i. Time should be "identified" in the names of the variables. Sometimes doing analysis is easier with wide format, especially if there are only a few time periods. However, it is good practice not to store data in wide format. Instead, the tidy approach prescribes storing multi-dimensional data in long format and transforming it for analysis when necessary. The advantages to the long format for Xt data are transparency and ease of management. It is straightforward to add new observations to long format tables, be those new cross-sectional units or new time periods, and it is easier to transform and clean variables." (Bekez, 2021)
