# Entity Resolution

"In many data tables that we start working with, we may observe strange things: the ID variable is not unique when it should be, we appear to have multiple observations with different ID variables for entities that should be the same, or we may have rows that are not for the kinds of entities we want. These are issues with the entities in the data table. Before doing any meaningful analysis, such issues need to be resolved, to the extent it is possible. That process is called **entity resolution**. One potential issue is having **duplicate observations**, or, simply, duplicates, in the data table. Duplicates appear when some entities that should be a single observation appear more than once in the data table ... When possible, duplicates need to be reduced to a single observation. In the simplest case, duplicates are perfect: the value of all variables is the same. In such cases, we have to delete the duplicates and leave one data row for each observation only. In more difficult cases, the value of one or more variables is different across data rows that appear to correspond to the same observation. Then, we have to make a decision about whether to keep all observations or select one and if the latter, which value to keep — or maybe create a new value, such as the average. A related but conceptually different issue is to have **ambiguous identification**: the same entity having different IDs across different data tables. The task here is to make sure that each entity has the same ID across data tables. That is necessary to link them properly. Entities are frequently identified by names. Unfortunately, though, names may cause issues for two main reasons: they are not unique (more than one person may be called John Smith), and different data tables may have different versions of the same name (e.g., middle names sometimes used, sometimes not: Ronald Fisher, Ronald A. Fisher, and Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher is the same person, a famous statistician). This task is called **disambiguation**: making the identification of entities not ambiguous. Yet another issue is having **non-entity observations**: rows that do not belong to an entity we want in the data table. Examples include a summary row in a table that adds up variables across some entities. For example, a data table downloaded from the World Bank on countries often includes observations on larger regions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, or the entire World, and they are included just like other rows in the data table together with the rows for individual countries. Before any meaningful analysis can be done, we need to erase such rows from the data table." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"The important message is this: assigning unique IDs is important ... Using numerical ID variables is good practice. Finally, note that, very often, there is no single best solution to entity resolution. We may not be 100% certain if different rows in the data table belong to the same real-life observation or not. Moreover, often it is not evident what to do when different values of a variable show up for the same real-life observation. As a result, our clean data table may end up not really 100 percent clean. But that is all right for the purpose of data analysis. Data analysts have to learn to live with such imperfections. When the magnitude of the problem is small, it is unlikely to have a substantial effect on the results of our subsequent analysis. When the magnitude of the problem is large, we may have to try different versions of solving it, and see if they have an effect on the results of our analysis." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;
