# Missing Values

"A frequent and important issue with variables is missing values ... First, missing values are not always straightforward to identify, and they may be mistakenly interpreted as some valid value ... Sometimes, missing values are recorded with number values, outside the range (e.g., 0 for no, 1 for yes, 9 for missing). Such values need to be replaced with a value that the software recognizes as missing. Identifying missing values and storing them in formats recognizable by statistical software is always a must ... The second issue with missing values is that they mean fewer observations in the data with valid information ... The problem is small if values are missing for one or two variables and only a few percent of the observations for each variable ... The third issue is potential selection bias ..." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"How can we tell whether values are missing at random or there is selection bias? The two approaches that work for assessing whether a sample represents a population work here as well: **benchmarking** and understanding the **selection process**. Benchmarking means comparing the distribution of variables that are available for all observations. Think of missing values of a variable y. Then benchmarking involves comparing some statistics, such as the mean or median of variables x, z, each of which is thought to be related to variable y, in two groups: observations with missing y and observations with non-missing y. If these statistics are different, we know there is a problem. Understanding the selection process requires knowing how the data was born and a good understanding of the content of the variables. In some other cases, missing is really just that: no information. Then we should understand why it is so — e.g., why some respondents refused to answer the survey question, or why some companies failed to report a value. However, in some cases missing doesn't really mean missing but zero, only the value zero was not filled in for the relevant observations. For example, a variable for export revenues in company-level data may be left missing for companies that do not have such revenue. But it means zero. When missing values can be replaced with meaningful ones, we should do so. In other cases, missing values decrease the quality of data, just like incomplete coverage." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Having missing values for some variables is a frequent problem ... But what can we do about them? There are two main options: First, we can work with observations that have non-missing values for all variables used in the analysis. This is the most natural and most common approach. It is usually a reasonable choice if the fraction of missing values is not too high, there are few variables affected, and selection bias is not too severe. One version of this approach is to work with observations that make up a well-defined subsample, in which the missing data problem is a lot less severe. For example, if missing values are a lot more prevalent among small firms in administrative data on firms, we may exclude all small firms from the data. The advantage of such a choice is transparency: the results of the analysis will refer to medium and large firms."&#x20;

"The second option is filling in some value for the missing values, such as the average value. This is called **imputation**. Imputation may make sense in some cases but not in others. In any case, imputation does not add information to the data ... When data analysts use many variables, imputation may make sense for some of them. There are sophisticated methods of imputation, but those are beyond the scope of this textbook. Partly for that reason, we advise against imputing missing values in general. Let us offer three practical pieces of advice regarding managing missing observations." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"First, when possible, focus on more fully filled variables. Sometimes the variable that best captures the information we need has many missing values, but a less perfect variable is available with few missing variables. For instance, working with data on customers, we may have a variable describing family income for each customer, but that information may be missing for most customers. Instead, we may have information on the zip code of their residence available for virtually all customers. In this case, it makes sense not to use the family income variable at all, and instead use a variable on the average family income in zip code locations available from another source. Importantly, when missing values are replaced with some other value, it is good practice to create a binary variable that indicates that the original value was missing. Such a variable is called **a flag.**" (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Second, imputation for qualitative variables should be done differently: these variables have no average value. Instead, we should add an additional category for missing values. For instance, consider the district of a hotel within a city. We would need to add " missing" as a new district value. For ordinal variables, we may also impute the median category and add a new variable denoting that the original value was missing." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Third, whatever we choose to do with missing values, we should make a conscious choice and document that choice. Some choices are more reasonable than others, depending on the situation. But all choices have consequences for the analysis. As with other steps of data cleaning, there may not be an obviously best solution to deal with missing values. Such imperfections are a fact of life for data analysts. Magnitudes matter: small issues are likely to have small effects on the results of our analysis; issues that affect many observations may have substantial effects. In the latter case, data analysts often try alternative decisions during the cleaning process and see whether and how they affect their results in the end." (Bekes, 2021)
