# Observation Classes

### Cross-Sectional Observations&#x20;

"In cross-sectional (xsec) data, observations are cross-sectional entities (i.e., units), such as people, firms, or countries ... In xsec data, each variable refers to the same time across units (e.g., same month, same year). Cross-sectional units are denoted by index i, e.g., variable x for cross-sectional unit i. The ID variable in cross-sectional data tables should identify each cross-sectional unit." (Bekez, 2021)

### Time Series Observations

"In time series (tseries) data, observations are different points or intervals in time, such as closing time of the stock market or the duration of a calendar year. These time series entities are also called time periods. In tseries data, all observations refer to the same entity (person, firm, country), and they are different in terms of the time period of observation. Time series observations are denoted by index t. The ID variables in time series data denote the time period of observation. Time periods are characterized by their time series frequency, also called periodicity. Time series frequency is the time difference between observations. Time series frequency may be yearly, monthly, weekly, daily, hourly, and so on. Time series frequency is lower if observations are less frequent ... \[and] higher if the observations are more frequent. For example, yearly data is of lower frequency than monthly data; weekly data is of higher frequency than monthly data. Time series frequency may also be irregular. For example, adjacent observations may refer to times of transactions, separated by as much time as happens to pass between the transactions. In fact most frequencies have some irregularities: years and months may have different numbers of days, or the effective time relevant for the variable may be different (such as the number of working days in a year to produce GDP in a country or the number of working hours in a month to produce output at a company). Whether and how one should address such irregularities is to be decided on a case by case basis." (Bekez, 2021)

### Multi-dimensional Observations

Multi-dimensional data have observations across multiple dimensions. The most common multidimensional data is cross-section\[al] time series data — also called xt data, longitudinal data, or panel data. xt data include multiple cross-sectional units observed multiple times. Examples include yearly financial data on all companies in a country, weekly sales at various retail stores, or quarterly macroeconomic data on various countries. Observations in xt data are one unit observed in one time period. Typically, observations in xt data are referred to using two indices — i for the cross-section and t for the time series — so that denotes variable x for xsec unit i at time t.&#x20;
