# Variables 3

### Discrete and Continuous Variables&#x20;

"One other way to classify a variable also helps determine which statistical methods are appropriate for it. This classification refers to the number of values in the measurement scale. A variable is discrete if its possible values form a set of separate numbers, such as 0, 1, 2, ... It is continuous if it can take an infinite continuum of possible real number values." (Agresti, 2018)

### Stock and Flow Variables&#x20;

Before turning to observations, let's consider one more way we can distinguish quantitative variables. In business, economics, and policy analysis we often work with quantities that could measure a flow or capture a stock. Flow variables are results of processes during some time. Typically, they are the result of activities over time. The textbook example of a flow variable is the amount of water in a river that flowed through a reservoir gate yesterday; economic examples include sales of chocolate last month and government deficit last year. Stock variables refer to quantities at a given point in time. Often, they are a snapshot of a business, a market, an economy, or a society. The textbook example is the amount of water in a reservoir at 8 a.m. this morning. Economic examples include the inventory of chocolate in a shop at the end of last month, or the amount of government debt at the end of last year. The importance of distinguishing flow and stock variables comes from how we typically work with them. For example, their meaningful aggregation differs: often, flow variables are summed (monthly sales to annual sales); stock variables are averaged (average inventory at the end of each month last year). But flow and stock variables may be related: the difference between stocks at different points in time are often related to flow variables. For example, the difference between inventories of a chocolate factory at the end of this month and the end of last month is the difference between chocolate production and chocolate sales during last month, two flow variables. Not every quantitative variable is either flow or stock: counterexamples include price and distance. But when a variable is either a flow or a stock, it may be important to keep that in mind. Types of Observations Just as it makes life easier to distinguish various kinds of variables, it makes sense to introduce concepts for types of observations. Recall that observations are the rows of a data table (Chapter 1, Section 1.1). But in different data tables observations may mean very different things. Those "things" are related to the actual physical or legal entities, or dimensions, our data is about, such as companies, individuals, days, or transactions.&#x20;

