# Variable scales

### Nominal, Ordinal, Interval, and Ratio Scales of Measurement&#x20;

"In terms of measurement scale, data analysts often distinguish four types of data: nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio. These may be thought of as refinements of the qualitative/quantitative classification.&#x20;

**Nominal variables** are qualitative variables with values that cannot be unambiguously ordered. Examples include the chocolate brand names a customer purchased or headquarters cities for chocolate makers. Individual decision-makers may have some ordering of these options, but there is no universally agreed ranking of all options for these types of variables.&#x20;

**Ordinal variables**, also known as **** ordered variables, take on values that are unambiguously ordered. All quantitative variables can be ordered; some qualitative variables can be ordered, too. Examples include subjective health measures (whether someone rates their health as poor, fair, good, very good, or excellent) or the strength of an opinion (e.g., whether one strongly agrees, agrees, disagrees, or strongly disagrees with a statement).&#x20;

**Interval variables** have the property that a difference between values means the same thing regardless of the magnitudes. All quantitative variables have this property, but qualitative variables don't ... A one-degree Celsius difference in temperature is the same when 20 is compared with 21 or 30 is compared with 31. A one-dollar price difference of $3 versus $4 is the same as $10 versus $1 1.&#x20;

**Ratio variables**, also known as scale variables, are interval variables with the additional property that their ratios mean the same regardless of the magnitudes. This additional property also implies a meaningful zero in the scale. Many but not all quantitative variables have this property. Measures of length, elapsed time, age, value, or size are typically ratio variables. Zero distance is unambiguous, and a 10 km run is twice as long as a 5 km run. A used car sold for zero dollars costs nothing unambiguously, and a used car sold for 8000 dollars is twice as expensive as one sold for 4000 dollars. An example of an interval variable that is not a ratio variable is temperature: 20 degrees is not twice as warm as 10 degrees, be it Celsius or Fahrenheit. Often, the raw data already has variables that fall into the groups described above, and they are ready for cleaning and then analysis. Sometimes, though, variables need to be created from the information we access. That may be challenging. Such difficult cases include texts, pictures, voice, and videos. For example, variables that we may want to create from text are the frequency of specific words or the proportion of positive or negative adjectives. Working with such information is a fast developing branch of data science, but it's beyond the scope of our textbook."
