# Central Limit Theorem

Mean and Standard Error of Sampling Distribution of y The sample mean y is a variable, because its value varies from sample to sample. For random samples, it fluctuates around the population mean 11, sometimes being smaller and sometimes being larger. In fact, the mean of the sampling distribution of y equals I-L. If we repeatedly took samples, then in the long run, the mean of the sample means would equal the population mean 1-1. The spread of the sampling distribution of y is described by its standard deviation, which is called the standard error of y. Standard Error The standard deviation of the sampling distribution of is called the standard error of y. The standard error of y is denoted by ffy. The standard error describes how y varies from sample to sample. Suppose we repeatedly selected samples of size n from the population, finding y for each set of n observations. Then, in the long run, the standard deviation of the y-values would equal the standard error. The symbol (instead of c) and the terminology standard error (instead of standard deviation) distinguish this measure from the standard deviation of the population distribution. In practice, we don't need to take samples repeatedly to find the standard error of y, because a formula is available. For a random sample of size n, the standard error of y depends on n and the population standard deviation by

Central Limit Theorem

For random sampling with a large sample size n, the sampling distribution of the sample mean y is approximately a normal distribution." (Agresti, 2018)
