# Cumulative Distribution

"A variation on the PDF is the CDF, the Cumulative Distribution Function. For each value in the distribution, the cdf shows the probability that the variable is equal to that value or a lower value. Thus, at each value of the distribution, the cdf equals the pdf plus the sum of all pdf below that value. Hence the name "cumulative": the cdf accumulates the pdf up to that point. Similarly to the pdf, the cdf is expressed as a function of the parameters of the theoretical distribution and is often represented graphically. The third advanced concept that is good to know about is the moments of distributions. Moments are a more general name for statistics like the mean and the variance for theoretical distributions. These are the expected value of the variable or the expected value of the square, cube, of the variable, or, like the variance, the expected value of the square, cube, of the variable minus its mean. Moments are numbered according to the power they take, so that the first moment is E\[x], the second moment is E\[x2], and so on. The variance is a second moment of the variable minus its mean so it is also called the second centered moment: E\[(x— Theoretical distributions are fully captured by a few parameters: these are statistics that determine the distributions. For each distribution we introduce their parameters, establish the range of possible values, show the shape of the histogram, and describe how the mean and standard deviation are related to the parameters of the distribution." (Bekes, 2021)
