# Frequency Distribution

"A frequency distribution is a listing of possible values for a variable, together with the number of observations at each value. A corresponding relative frequency distribution lists the possible values together with their proportions or percentages." (Agresti, 2018)

"It is good practice to examine distributions of all important variables as the first step of exploratory data analysis. The simplest and most popular way to visualize a distribution is the histogram. The histogram is a bar chart that shows the (absolute or relative) frequency of each value. The bars can be presented horizontally; that's more common in business presentations and when there are few bars. The more traditional presentation is vertical bars. For binary variables, the distribution is the frequency of the two possible values and thus the histogram consists of two bars. For variables that take on a few values, the histogram shows as many bars as the number of possible values. For variables with many potential values, showing bars for each value is usually uninformative. Instead, it's better to group the many values in fewer groupings or bins. The histogram with binned variables shows bars with the number or percentage of observations within each bin. It is good practice to create bins of equal width so each bin covers the same range of values ... It is good practice to experiment with a few alternative bin sizes to make sure that important features of the distribution don't remain hidden." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Visual inspection of a histogram reveals many important properties of a distribution. It can inform us about the number and location of modes: these are the peaks in the distribution that stand out from their immediate neighborhood. Most distributions with many values have a center and tails, and the histogram shows the approximate regions for the center and the tails. Some distributions are more symmetric than others. **Asymmetric distributions** (also called **skewed distributions**) have a long left tail or a long right tail; histograms visualize those. Histograms also show if there are extreme values in a distribution: values that are very different from the rest." (Bekes, 2021)

"Density plots — also called kernel density estimates — are an alternative to histograms for variables with many values. Instead of bars, density plots show continuous curves. We may think of them as curves that wrap around the corresponding histograms. Similarly to histograms, there are details to set for density plots, and those details may make them look very different. The most important detail to specify is the bandwidth, the closest thing to bin size for histograms. Density plots are less precise than histograms, and hence we advise you to rely on histograms when possible." (Bekes, 2021)

