# Extreme Values

"Some quantitative variables have extreme values: substantially larger or smaller values for one or a handful of observations than the rest. Sometimes extreme values don't belong in the distribution because they are errors ... But other times extreme values are an integral part of the distribution. Indeed, they may be the most important observations. For example, in investment decisions, extreme future returns and their frequencies are among the most important things to know as they may lead to huge losses or huge gains. The overall gain or loss of such an investment may be determined by a few extreme events as opposed to the cumulative result of many small gains or losses. Similarly, when the question is about what damages to expect from floods or earthquakes, it's the largest of damages that we should care about. Some data analysts call extreme values **outliers**. We prefer not to use that term as it implies that they do not belong in the distribution, which may or may not be the case." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Box plots identify outliers separately. To explain this, we now present a formal definition of an outlier. An observation is an outlier if it falls more than 1.5(lQR) above the upper quartile or more than 1.5(lQR) below the lower quartile. In box plots, the whiskers extend to the smallest and largest observations only if those values are not outliers; that is, if they are no more than 1.5(IQR) beyond the quartiles. Otherwise, the whiskers extend to the most extreme observations within 1.5(IQR), and the outliers are marked separately." (Agresti, 2018)

"The most worrying problem with extreme values is that they may not show up in a dataset even if they are an inherent characteristic of a variable. Extreme values, by nature, are indeed rare. For example, data spanning a few years may not have instances of the most extreme losses on an asset that may come in the future. When extreme values are included in our data, we need to identify them. Visualizing the distribution via a histogram is a good way to catch extreme values." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"What to do, if anything, with extreme values, is a more difficult question. It depends both on why extreme values occur and what the ultimate question of the analysis is. Extreme values that occur due to error should be replaced by a missing value marker or, in the rare case when one can infer the correct value, by that correct value ... More often, extreme values are an inherent part of the distribution. The size of the largest countries or firms, the salaries of chief executives in a firm, the best-paid actors among all actors, or a large drop in asset prices on the day of a stock-market crash are not errors. What we do in such cases depends on the question of our analysis. If the question is more relevant for the rest of the observations, we may discard the observations with extreme values and restrict the analysis to the rest. When we look into how salaries and other incentives may keep employees at a firm, it makes sense not to focus on chief executives but restrict the analysis to the other employees. When we want to know how distance to main highways affects the price of commercial real estate, we may discard the largest cities and focus on smaller towns. It is good practice to be explicit about such decisions when presenting the results of the analysis, saying that the analysis is relevant for some kinds of observations but not for others. In fact, what, if anything, we should do with observations with extreme values of a variable depends also on the role of the variable in our analysis ... Data analysts tend to be conservative when discarding observations with extreme y values (dependent variables): they usually keep them unless they are errors. However, data analysts tend to be less conservative when discarding observations with extreme x values: they often discard them even if they are parts of the distribution. The reason is in the different roles y and x play in the analysis. Discarding observations with extreme x values narrows the scope of the comparisons. That's a transparent decision, because it defines what kinds of comparisons we want to make. In contrast, discarding observations with extreme y values changes the result of the comparisons. The consequences of this decision are not straightforward, and it's often safer to avoid those consequences." (Bekes, 2021)
