# Frequencies

Let's start with the most basic property of variables: what values they can take and how often they take each of those values. We first introduce the concept of frequency that makes sense from the viewpoint of the data we have. Then we generalize frequencies to the concept of probability that makes sense in more abstract settings. The absolute frequency, or count, of a value of a variable is simply the number of observations with that particular value in the data. The relative frequency is the frequency expressed in relative, or percentage, terms: the proportion of observations with that particular value among all observations in the data. If a variable has missing values, this proportion can be relative to all observations including the missing values or only to observations with non-missing values. Most often we express proportions excluding observations with missing values. When our goal is to check the data cleaning process, absolute frequencies including missing values is the better option.&#x20;

Probability is a general concept that is closely related to relative frequency. Probability is a measure of the likelihood of an event. An event is something that may or may not happen. In the context of data, an event is the occurrence of a particular value of a variable. For example, an event in a data table is that the manager of the firm is female. This event may occur various times in the data. The probability of the event is its relative frequency: the proportion of firms with a female manager among all firms in the data.&#x20;

Probabilities are always between zero and one. We denote the probability of an event as P(event), so that 0 <= P(event) <= 1. Sometimes they are expressed in percentage terms so they are between 0% and 100%: 0% <= P(event) <= 100%. Considering a single event, it either happens or does not. These two are mutually exclusive: the probability of an event happening and it also not happening is zero. We denote an event not happening as \~event so P(event & \~event) = 0.

Probabilities are more general than relative frequencies as they can describe events without data. However, with some creative thinking, we can often think of potential data that contains the event so that its probability is a proportion. Data on what's for lunch at our canteen for many days is an example. If we had such data, the frequency of the event (pasta served for lunch) would give its probability.&#x20;

But not always. Sometimes probabilities may be defined for events for which no data can be imagined. These include subjective probabilities that describe the degree of uncertainty an individual feels about events that may happen in the future but have no precedents. Examples include the probability that you, the reader, will like this textbook enough to keep it for future reference, or the probability that rising sea levels will flood the underground system of Singapore within 20 years. Abstract probabilities are interesting and important from various points of view. But data analysts work with actual data. For most of them, probabilities and frequencies are closely related. Thus, most data analysts tend to think of probabilities as relative frequencies in actual data or data they can imagine.
