# Lognormal Distribution

"The normal is a bad approximation to real-life variables with extreme values. Extreme values are very unlikely in the normal distribution. For example, the normal distribution formula suggests that only 0.3% of the values of a normally distributed variable should be more than three standard deviations above the mean; only 0.000 000 2% should be higher than six standard deviations above the mean. Besides the absence of extreme values, symmetry is another feature of the normal distribution that makes it a bad approximation to many economic variables. Earnings, income, wealth, and firm productivity are usually asymmetrically distributed with long right tails. One theoretical distribution that may be a better approximation to such variables is the lognormal distribution.&#x20;

The **lognormal distribution** is very asymmetric, with a long right tail, potentially including many extreme values at the positive end (but not at the other end). The lognormal distribution is derived from the normal distribution. If we take a variable that is distributed normally (x) and raise e to its power (ex), the resulting variable is distributed lognormally. The old variable is the natural logarithm of the new variable, hence the name of the new distribution (the log of which is normal). Because we raised e to the power of the original variable, the values of the resulting lognormal variable are always positive. They range between zero and positive infinity (never reaching either). By convention, the parameters of the lognormal are the mean and standard deviation o of the original, normally distributed variable, which is the logarithm of the new variable. Thus the mean and the standard deviation of the lognormal are complicated functions of these parameters. They are:

\
There are real-life variables that are approximately lognormally distributed. These include distributions of price, income, and firm size. Variables are well approximated by the lognormal if they are the result of many things multiplied together (the natural log of them is thus a sum). Another way to think about lognormal variables is that their percentage differences are normally distributed. Thus, they do not have many extreme values in terms of percentage differences. (Note that normally distributed percentage differences translate into quite extreme differences in terms of absolute values.)" (Bekes, 2021)
