# Probability

"Probability is a general concept that is closely related to relative frequency. Probability is a measure of the likelihood of an event. An event is something that may or may not happen. In the context of data, an event is the occurrence of a particular value of a variable. For example, an event in a data table is that the manager of the firm is female. This event may occur various times in the data. The probability of the event is its relative frequency: the proportion of firms with a female manager among all firms in the data." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Probabilities are always between zero and one. We denote the probability of an event as P(event), so that 0 <= P(event) <= 1. Sometimes they are expressed in percentage terms so they are between 0% and 100%: 0% <= P(event) <= 100%. Considering a single event, it either happens or does not. These two are mutually exclusive: the probability of an event happening and it also not happening is zero. We denote an event not happening as \~event so P(event & \~event) = 0." (Bekes, 2021)

"Sometimes probabilities may be defined for events for which no data can be imagined. These include subjective probabilities that describe the degree of uncertainty an individual feels about events that may happen in the future but have no precedents. Examples include the probability that you, the reader, will like this textbook enough to keep it for future reference or the probability that rising sea levels will flood the underground system of Singapore within 20 years. Abstract probabilities are interesting and important from various points of view. But data analysts work with actual data. For most of them, probabilities and frequencies are closely related. Thus, most data analysts tend to think of probabilities as relative frequencies in actual data or data they can imagine." (Bekes, 2021)
