# Skewness

"For symmetric distributions, the median and the mean are identical. For skewed distributions, the mean lies toward the direction of skew (the longer tail) relative to the median ... If a distribution is highly skewed, the median is usually preferred because it better represents what is typical." (Agresti, 2018)

"While measures of central value (such as mean, median) and spread (such as range, standard deviation) are usually well known, summary statistics that measure skewness are less frequently used. At the same time skewness can be an important feature of a distribution, showing whether a few observations are responsible for much of the spread. Moreover, there is a very intuitive measure for skewness (which exists in a few variants). Recall that a distribution is skewed if it isn't symmetric. A distribution may be skewed in two ways, having a long left tail or having a long right tail. A long left tail means having a few observations with small values with most observations having larger values. A long right tail means having a few observations with large values with most observations having smaller values. Earlier we showed that the hotel price distributions has a long right tail — such as in Figure 3.4. That is quite typical: skewness with a long right tail is frequent among variables in business, economics, and policy, such as with prices, incomes, and population. The statistic of skewness compares the mean and the median and is called the mean—median measure of skewness. When the distribution is symmetric, its mean and median are the same. When it is skewed with a long right tail, the mean is larger than the median: the few very large values in the right tail tilt the mean further to the right. Conversely, when a distribution is skewed with a long left tail, the mean is smaller than the median: the few very small values in the left tail tilt the mean further to

the left. The mean-median measure of skewness captures this intuition. In order to make this measure comparable across various distributions, we use a standardized measure, dividing the difference by the standard deviation. (Sometimes this measure is multiplied by 3, and then it's called Pearson's second measure of skewness. Yet other times the difference is divided by the mean, median, or some other statistic.)" (Bekes, 2021)
