# Standardized Values

"The standard deviation is often used to re-calculate differences between values of a quantitative variable, in order to express those values relative to what a typical difference would be. In a formula, this amounts to dividing the difference by the standard deviation. Such measures are called standardized differences. A widely used standardized difference is from the mean value; it is called the standardized value of a variable or the z-score of the variable." (Bekes, 2021)

"How Many Standard Deviations from the Mean? The z-Score Another way to measure position is by the number of standard deviations that a point falls from the mean. For example, the U.S. murder rates shown in the box plot in Figure 3.18 have a mean of 7.3 and a standard deviation of 4.0. The value of 20.3 for Louisiana falls 20.3 - 7.3 13.0 above the mean. Now, 13 is 13/4 = 3.25 standard deviations. The Louisiana murder rate is 3.25 standard deviations above the mean. The number of standard deviations that an observation falls from the mean is called its z-score. For the murder rates of Figure 3.18, Louisiana has a z-score oi 20.3 7.3 Observation — Mean = 3.25. 4.0 Standard Deviation By the Empirical Rule, for a bell-shaped distribution it is very unusual for an observation to fall more than three standard deviations from the mean. An alternative criterion regards an observation as an outlier if it has a z-score larger than 3 in absolute value. By this criterion, the murder rate for Louisiana is an outlier. We'll study z-scores in more detail in the next chapter. We'll see they are especially useful for bell-shaped distributions." (Agresti, 2018)
