# Data Collection Issues

"Observations in data analyzed in business, economics, or policy most often concern people or firms. Collecting and using such data is subject to strong legal and ethical constraints and rules. These constraints and rules are meant to protect the subjects of data collection: the business interests of firms, physical and mental health, safety, and integrity of people. Observing these constraints and rules is extremely important: breaching them can have severe consequences for ongoing data collection and beyond. When the rules are not observed, firms or people may decline participation or take legal action during or after data collection. These, in turn, may affect not only the ongoing data collection but also the general attitude of potential respondents toward data collection in society. One general principle is confidentiality. In general, data users should not be able to learn sensitive information about identifiable subjects of the data collection. Sensitive information includes, but is not restricted to, information that may harm firms or individuals. When the data contains sensitive information, the principle of confidentiality implies that respondents should be impossible to identify. At a minimum that means that data needs to be de-identified: names and addresses should not be part of the dataset. But it is more than that. Some variables, or combinations of variables, may help identify firms or persons even without names and addresses. Ensuring confidentiality also means ensuring that no such combination allows respondents to be identified from observations. The collection of data on people, or, as sometimes referred to, human subjects, is subject to a large body of regulation at both international and national levels. The regulation originates from medical research, but it has been adapted for data collection for non-medical purposes, too. The most important guiding principles include respect for persons (people should be treated as autonomous human beings), their protection from harm, and their equal treatment during data collection. It is good practice to obtain informed consent from people for collecting data on them. This means not only data collected here and now but also potential linkages to other data sources. In fact, when data collection is supported by research grants from government or non-governmental foundations, these, and many more, principles are required to be observed. Another general principle is ownership of information. A lot of information and a lot of data is available on the web or offline. However, availability does not imply the right to analyze that data for any purpose. Who owns that information and what the owner permits to be done with that information is not always easy to find out. Nevertheless, we should always aim to understand the details of ownership and usage rights to make sure it is ethical and legal to collect and use the data. The rules of data collection are complex. One seemingly good way to think about these issues is to consider ourselves to be a subject of the data collection and think about what protection we would need to feel safe and be willing to participate. Another seemingly good starting point is to consider whether similar data was collected recently. But these are not enough. Practices may not be OK just because we, as data analysts, would feel comfortable with them, or a recent data collection project got away with them. Instead, it is strongly advised to consult experts in the legal and ethical aspects of data collection." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;
