# Data Sources

"Some international organizations, governments, central banks, and some other organizations collect and store data to be used for analysis. Often, such data is available free of charge. For example, the World Bank collects many time series of government finances, business activity, health, and many others, for all countries. We shall use some of that data in our case studies. Another example is FRED, collected and stored by the US Federal Reserve system, which includes economic time series data on the USA and some other countries. One way to gather information from such providers is to visit their website and download a data table. Instead of clicking and downloading, data analysts may use an **Application Programming Interface**, or API, to directly load data into a statistical software package. An API is a software intermediary, or an interface, that allows programs, or scripts, to talk to each other. Using an API, data analysts may load these datasets into their statistical software as part of the code they write for that software. Besides data collected and provided for the purposes of analysis, there is a lot of information out there that can be turned into useful data even though it is not collected for the purpose of analysis ... Collecting data from the web using code is called **web scraping**. Well-written web scraping code can load and extract data from multiple web pages. Some websites are easier to scrape than others, depending on how they structure and present information. There are many web scraping software solutions available, and there is a lot of help available online. In the end, scraping is writing code so it requires both general experience in coding and learning the specifics of scraping ... **Surveys** collect data by asking people questions and recording their answers. Typically, the answers are short and easily transformed into variables, either qualitative or quantitative. People answering questions are called respondents. The set of questions presented to respondents is called a questionnaire. There are two major kinds of surveys: **self-administered surveys** and **interviews**." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;
