# Interviews

"Interviews **** are the other main way to conduct surveys besides self-administration. They create a survey situation with two participants: an interviewer and a respondent. During survey interviews, interviewers ask the questions of the survey and nothing else. In a broader sense, interviews may include freer conversations, but here we focus on surveys. Interviews may be conducted in-person or over the telephone. Modern interviews are often done with the help of a laptop, tablet, or other device. Such computer-aided interviews share some advantages with web surveys. They allow for checks on admissible answers and consistency across answers, and, sometimes, the use of visualization, videos, and voice. With answers entered into such devices, they can then produce data tables that are ready to use. An advantage of interviewers is the potential for high validity. Interviewers can, and are often instructed to, help respondents understand questions as they are intended to be understood. Interviewers may also help convince respondents to participate in surveys thus leading to better coverage. At the same time, comparability of answers may be an issue with interviews. Different interviewers may ask the same survey question in different ways, add different details, may help in different ways, or record answers differently. All this may result in interviewer effects: systematic differences between answers recorded by different interviewers even if the underlying variables have no such differences. It is good practice to mitigate these interviewer effects during data collection by precise instructions to interviewers and thorough training. The main disadvantage of interviews is their cost. Interviewers need to be compensated for the time they spend recruiting respondents, interviewing them, and, in the case of personal interviews, traveling to meet them. Interviews are thus substantially more expensive than self-administered surveys, especially if they invest in insuring high data quality by using computer-aided techniques and intensive training. Mixed-mode surveys use different methods within the same survey: telephone for some and web for others; in-person for some and telephone for others, and so on. Sometimes the same person is asked to answer different questions in different survey modes. Sometimes different people are asked to participate in different modes. Usually, the idea behind mixed mode surveys is saving on costs while maintaining appropriate coverage. They allow for data to be collected at lower costs for some variables, or some observations, using the more costly survey mode only when needed. Comparability may be an issue in mixed-mode surveys when different people answer the same question in different modes. Extensive research shows that answers to many kinds of questions compare well across survey modes but that some kinds of questions tend to produce less comparable answers." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;
