# Sample

"To analyze social phenomena with statistical analysis, descriptive methods summarize the data and inferential methods use sample data to make predictions about populations. In gathering data, we must decide which subjects to sample. Selecting a sample that is representative of the population is a primary topic of this chapter." (Agresti, 2018)

"Sometimes data is collected on all possible observations, attempting complete coverage. This makes sense when we are targeting limited observations (e.g., employees of a medium-sized firm) or the marginal cost of data collection is negligible (as with web scraping). Often, though, finding more observations may be costly (e.g., recruiting respondents for surveys), and collecting data on new observations may also have high costs (e.g., additional personal interviews). In such cases, it makes sense to gather information on only a subset of all potential observations. Data collection here is preceded by sampling: selecting observations for which data should be collected. The set of observations on which data is collected in the end is called the sample. The larger set of observations from which a sample is selected is called the population or universe. Samples have to represent the population. A sample is representative if the distribution of all variables in the sample is the same as, or very close to, their corresponding distribution in the population. (The distribution of variables is the frequency of their values, e.g., fraction female, percent with income within a certain range) A representative sample of products in a supermarket has the same distribution of prices, sales, and frequency of purchase as all products in the supermarket." (Bekes, 2021)

"as when all transactions are considered. A representative sample of workers in an economy has the same distribution of demographic characteristics, skills, wages, and so on, as all workers in the economy. Representative samples do not cover all observations in the population, but they are free from selection bias. Whether a sample is representative is impossible to tell directly. We don't know the value of all variables for all observations in the population, otherwise we would not need to collect data from a sample in the first place. There are two ways of assessing whether a sample is representative: evaluating the data collection process and, if possible, benchmarking the few variables for which we know the distribution in the population. Benchmarking looks at variables for which we know something in the population. We can benchmark our sample by comparing the distribution of those variables in the sample to those in the population. One example could be comparing the share of various industries in a sample of companies to the share of industries published by the government, based on data that includes the population of companies. If this kind of benchmarking reveals substantial differences then the sample is not representative. If it shows similar distributions then the sample is representative for the variable, or variables, used in the comparison. It may or may not be representative for other variables. A successful benchmarking is necessary but not sufficient for a sample to be representative. The other way to establish whether a sample is representative, besides benchmarking, is evaluating the sampling process. That means understanding how exactly the observations were selected, what rules were supposed to be followed, and to what extent those rules were followed. To understand what good sampling methods are, the next section introduces the concept of random sampling, argues why it leads to representative samples, and provides examples of random samples." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

Sampling Error

For conclusions based on statistical inference to be worthwhile, we should know the potential sampling error—how much the statistic differs from the parameter it predicts because of the way results naturally exhibit variation from sample to sample. The sampling error of a statistic equals the error that occurs when we use a statistic based on a sample to predict the value of a population parameter. For sample sizes of about 1000, we'll see that the sampling error for estirnaling percentages is usually no oreater than plus or minus 3%. This bound is the Illargin error. In practice, the sampling error is unknown, because the values of population parameters are unknown. Random sampling protects against bias, in the sense that the sampling error tends to fluctuate about 0, sometimes being positive (as in the Harris poll) and sometimes being negative (as in the Gallup poll). Random sampling also allows us to predict the likely size of the sampling error.

&#x20;
