# Surveys

"In self-administered surveys, respondents are left on their own to answer questions. Typically, the questions are presented to them in writing. Web surveys are the most important example. Respondents see the questions on the screen of a web-connected device, and they tap, click, or enter text to answer the questions. The answers are immediately recorded and transformed into an appropriate data table. This feature is an important advantage of web surveys: there is no need for anyone else to enter the data or put it into an appropriate structure. That means lower costs and less room for error. Respondents need to be recruited to participate in web surveys just like in any other survey. Apart from that, however, web surveys have low marginal costs: once the web questionnaire is up and running, having more respondents answer them incurs practically no extra cost. Before the web, self-administered surveys were done on paper, and respondents were most often required to mail the filled-out questionnaires. That method entailed higher costs and, arguably, more burden on respondents. Besides low costs and quick access to data, web surveys have other advantages. They can present questions with visual aids and interactive tools, and they can embed videos and sound. They may be programmed to adapt the list and content of questions based on what respondents entered previously. Web surveys can include checks to ensure cleaner data. For example, they can give alerts to respondents if their answers do not seem to make sense or are inconsistent with the information given earlier A disadvantage of self-administered questionnaires is that they leave little room for clarifying what the questions are after This may affect the validity of measurement: respondents may answer questions thinking that some questions are about something different from what was intended. Web surveys have an advantage over traditional paper-based surveys in that they can accommodate explanations or help. However, it is up to the respondents to invoke such help, and there is little room to follow up if the help received is not enough. Another disadvantage of some self-administered surveys is a high risk of incomplete and biased coverage. Potential respondents are left on their own to decide whether to participate, and those that can and choose to participate may be different from everyone else. People without access to the Internet can't answer web surveys. People who can't read well can't answer self-administered surveys that are presented in writing. The coverage issue is more severe in some cases (e.g., surveys of children, of the elderly, or in developing countries) than in others (e.g., surveys of university students). Moreover, when respondents are left on their own, they may be less likely to participate in surveys than when someone is there to talk them into it. With ingenuity and investment these issues may be mitigated (offering web connection, presenting questions in voice, offering compensation). Nevertheless, incomplete and biased coverage need special attention in the case of self-administered surveys." (Bekes, 2021)&#x20;

"Surveys need respondents who are willing to participate and answer the questions. The fraction of people that were successfully contacted and who answered the questionnaire is called the response rate. A low response rate increases the chance of selection bias. That is, of course, not necessarily true: a sample with an 80% response rate may be more biased than another sample with a 40% response rate. It is good practice to report response rates with the data description and, if possible, to benchmark variables available in the population." (Bekes, 2021)
