# The Y and the X

Much of data analysis is built on comparing values of a y variable by values of an x variable, or more x variables. Such a comparison can uncover **patterns of association** between the two variables: whether and how observations with particular values of one variable (x) tend to have particular values of the other variable (y).&#x20;

The role of y is different from the role of x. It's the values of y we are interested in, and we compare observations that are different in their x values. This asymmetry comes from the goal of our analysis. One goal of data analysis is predicting the value of a y variable with the help of other variables. The prediction itself takes place when we know the values of those other variables but not the y variable. To predict y based on the other variables we need a rule that tells us what the predicted y value is as a function of the values of the other variables. Such a rule can be devised by analyzing data where we know the y values, too. Those other variables are best thought of as many x variables. We use the same letter, x, for these variables and distinguish them by subscripts only because their role in prediction is similar. For instance, to predict the price of Airbnb rentals, we need x variables that matter for that price, such as number of rooms and beds, and location (we will investigate this in Chapters 14 and 16). To predict whether applicants for unsecured loans will repay their loans, we need variables that matter for that repayment probability, such as applicants' income, occupation, age, and family status.&#x20;

The other most frequent goal of data analysis is to learn about the effect of a causal variable x on an outcome variable y. Here, we typically are interested in what the value of y would be if we could change x. how sales would change if we raised prices; whether the proportion of people getting sick in a group would decrease if they received vaccination; how the employment chances of unemployed people would increase if they participated in a training program. Data analysis can help uncover such effects by examining data with both y and x and comparing values of y between observations with different values of x. Examples of observations with different x values indicate weeks with different prices, groups with different vaccination rates, or people who participated in a training program versus people who didn't. Often, when trying to uncover the effect of x on y, data analysts consider other variables, too.&#x20;

In sum, deciding on what's y and what's x in the data is the first step before doing any meaningful analysis.
